---
layout: default
title: About
---


![Profile Image]({{site.url}}/assets/images/me.jpeg)

Hi! I am Amogh Jalihal and I am currently a PhD Candidate at [Virginia
Tech](http://www.vt.edu/), in the Genetics, Bioinformatics, and
Computational Biology Program. My current research interest involves
dynamical modeling of biological processes, specifically in the
context of yeast biology.  I am currently co-advised by Professors
[John Tyson](http://mpf.biol.vt.edu/lab_website/) and
[T.M. Murali](http://bioinformatics.cs.vt.edu/~murali/). Details of my
current research project can be found
[here](/2017/01/01/nutrient-signaling.html).

Previously, in Fall 2016, I worked with [Dr. Silke
Hauf](http://www.hauflab.org/) during my graduate school rotations,
where I was investigating the phenomenon of *order in chromosome
segregation* in *S. pombe*; simultaneously, I was developing an
automated image analysis work-flow to analyse dynamics of cell-cycle
regulators.

Before I joined Virginia Tech, in Spring 2015, I worked with [Dr. Abby
Dernburg](https://mcb.berkeley.edu/labs/dernburg/) at [UC
Berkeley](http://www.berkeley.edu/) where I was involved in aproject
which combined comparative evolution and meiosis, focussing on the
variation in meiotic recombination machinery in the model nematode
*C. elegans* and its cousin *P. pacificus*. There, I spent most of my
time optimizing imaging protocols for fixed cell fluorescence imaging
in *P. pacifius*.

During the Summer of 2014, as part of
[NIGINTERN](https://www.nig.ac.jp/jimu/soken/intern/2017/index.html)
program at the [National Institute of Genetics,
Japan](https://www.nig.ac.jp/nig/), I carried out a small project
under the guidance of [Dr. Akatsuki
Kimura](https://www.nig.ac.jp/nig/research/organization-top/organization/kimura)
where I was introduced to nematode biology and image analysis.

This webpage is my attempt at documenting some of my computational
adventures systematically. Apart from ~~microscopy~~, scripting and
mathematical modeling, I also like listening to and making music.


